Josfaj/plt 602 new intro plutus core readthedocs (#4820)
input-output-hk/plutus: doc/index.rst

Plutus Core and Plutus Tx user guide
==================================================

Plutus Core
---------------------

The Plutus project consists of Plutus Core, the programming language used for 
scripts on Cardano; tooling and compilers for compiling various intermediate 
languages into Plutus Core; and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell 
source code into Plutus Core to form the on-chain part of a contract application. 
All of this is used in combination to write Plutus Core scripts that run on the 

> Cardano blockchain. The Cardano ledger is able to interact with compiled Plutus Core 

Reviewer: The reference to cardano ledger seems orphaned (could be just me). Some questions come to mind: What is the cardano ledger? How is it different from the blockchain? What is a ledger interface? Why are they mentioned here?

Author: My thought was to try to paint an overview picture here. But you may be right that it is misplaced here. I am inclined to remove that statement unless someone else feels otherwise.

scripts through the ledger interface. 

This documentation introduces the Plutus Core programming language and programming 
with Plutus Tx. It includes explanations, tutorials, how-to instructions, 
troubleshooting, and reference information. 

The intended audience of this documentation includes people who want to implement 
smart contracts on the Cardano blockchain. This involves using Plutus Tx to write 
scripts, requiring some knowledge of the Haskell programming language. 

.. note::

>    See the `public Plutus libraries documentation <https://playground.plutus.iohkdev.io/doc/haddock/>`_ 

Reviewer 2: No, this is _incredibly_ out of date and is going to die. Let us never mention it.

Author: I've removed this. I look forward to being able to include a link to Haddock documentation in the (hopefully) near future.

   to access Haddock-generated documentation of all the code. 

This guide is also meant for certification companies, certification auditors, 

> and people who need to reference specifications. See, for example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and people who need an accurate specification. See, for example: 
```
I think this sounds a bit better.

Author: Thanks for your suggestion. I'll incorporate that.

Plutus Programming and Reference Guide
=============================================

About Plutus
--------------------

Plutus consists of Plutus Core, the programming, scripting and assembly language; 

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Reviewer 3: Plutus Tx usually refers to the compiler, I think. We can come up with some standard names for (1) the Haskell code compiled by Plutus Tx, which is a subset of Haskell; (2) the libraries we provide (e.g., PlutusTx.List) for writing such code.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, we have always had some confusion here. Originally "Plutus Tx" mean "the subset of Haskell compiled by the plugin", but this is also confusing, since it's not really a language... the language is Haskell! So the terminology here has always been a mess.

And it's not helped by the fact that the `plutus-tx` package is now 90% standard library, rather than anything else.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Reviewer 4: is there one compiler with multiple stages or multiple compilers? I hadn't heard this use of the term 'Plutus Tx' before. It might be worth mentioning Plutus IR as a signification intermediate language.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Author: @jmchapman I haven't seen a reference anywhere so far to Plutus IR. However, there are a lot of references in the Plutus Core readthedocs to the Plutus Tx compiler. Let me know, though, if you think this is an important distinction to make. I'd like to discuss further if needed.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Reviewer 2: It would be good to sort all this out, yes. Maybe we need to talk about it, it's all bit murky and I'm not sure what the best thing to do is.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Reviewer 4: > @jmchapman I haven't seen a reference anywhere so far to Plutus IR.

Right sorry, I am just looking at the PR without having looked at the rest of the documentation.

It's covered in this paper - https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/unraveling-recursion-compiling-an-ir-with-recursion-to-system-f/

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Author: How about we schedule a meeting with the appropriate people sometime next week? I'll work on getting as clear as possible about what the precise questions are and send them out in advance.

> and Plutus Tx, the compiler that compiles the Haskell source code into Plutus Core 

Author: I'd like to get input from the team about how to reference Plutus IR. I've looked at the paper "Unraveling recursion: compiling an IR with recursion to System F" briefly. This would be one of the topics I'd like to put on our agenda for when we meet.

to form the on-chain part of a contract application. All of this is used in combination 

> to write Plutus scripts that run on the Cardano blockchain. Compiled Plutus Core 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to write Plutus Core scripts that run on the Cardano blockchain. Compiled Plutus Core 
```

Author: "Core" added

> scripts or programs are able to interact with the Cardano ledger through the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scripts are able to interact with the Cardano ledger through the 
```

> ledger interface. 

Reviewer 2: When we talk about the "ledger interface" we usually mean the interface that _we_ provide to the ledger, not the interface that the ledger provides to scripts.

Author: That's helpful to know. I've updated this statement to look like this: 

"The Cardano ledger is able to interact with compiled Plutus Core scripts or programs through the ledger interface."

Reviewer 2: Also I'm not sure whether the target audience actually needs to know about that.

> The Plutus Core Repository

Reviewer 2: Unsure if we should use "Plutus" unqualified here since that is what the repository is called... maybe we should rename the repo!

Author: I've changed the heading to "The Plutus Core Repository"

Author: Wait a sec, I may have misunderstood you. Are you suggesting that perhaps this heading should be "The Plutus Repository"? I would prefer to stay with the usage you prefer about not using "Plutus" unqualified. I get that Plutus is the name of the repo at this point. But it may be useful to use the heading "The Plutus Core Repository" if that's how people should think about it conceptually. Hmmm.

Author: Somewhere there is a duplication of this comment that I've replied to. I'd rather go with "The Plutus Core Repository" unless that actually creates an issue. Let's chat about it when we get a chance.

Reviewer 2: I mean "The Plutus Repository" because it's literally called `plutus`. Part of the issue is that calling it the "Plutus Core" repository isn't quite right either, since there's more than Plutus Core in there!

Author: OK, I've edited it to be "The Plutus Repository"

----------------------------------

> The `Plutus Core Repository <https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus>`_ contains 

Reviewer 5: It contains a lot more than that! Maybe an appendix with a list of packages in the repo and their intros/usages/summary would be nice?

Author: Thanks for your feedback on this point. I think it deserves more attention, so I'll build on this further.

Author: At Ziyang's suggestion, I'm adding this: 

It also contains the Plutus Tx compiler and the libraries for writing Haskell code 
that can be compiled to Plutus Core.

Author: I've created a story in Jira to add a page listing the packages in the repo with descriptions, etc.

the implementation, specification, and mechanized metatheory of Plutus Core. 

> It also contains Plutus Tx. 

Reviewer 3: I'd say "It also contains the Plutus Tx compiler and the libraries for writing Haskell code that can be compiled to Plutus Core".

Author: Thank you, that's helpful!

About This Documentation
---------------------------------

> The purpose of this documentation is to serve as an introduction to the Plutus language 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The purpose of this documentation is to serve as an introduction to the Plutus Core language 
```

Author: "Core" added

> and to programming in Plutus. It is meant to be educational, so it includes explanations, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and to programming using Plutus Tx. It is meant to be educational, so it includes explanations, 
```

> tutorials and how-to instructions. It is also intended as a reference for beginning and 

Reviewer: Isn't this contradicting yourself? Is it an introduction or a reference? The introduction should serve as a starting point, while a reference contains everything.

Author: Good point. I was thinking that it could potentially be trying to wear both hats to some extent, but maybe that isn't quite accurate.

experienced developers. 

Intended Audience
---------------------------

> The intended audience of this documentation includes DApp developers, Plutus developers, 

Reviewer 3: These all seem to be the same group of people to me - people who need to implement smart contracts. Alternatively you can list what you assume of the audience, e.g., know how to program in some language; Haskell knowledge is helpful but not required, etc.

Reviewer 2: What's a "Plutus developer"?

Author: @zliu41 Thanks for your comments. I've inserted "PlutusTx.List" as an example of a library.

Reviewer 2: There is no such thing as a "Plutus script". There can be "Plutus Core scripts" or "Haskell programs which get compiled into Plutus Core".

Author: OK, thanks for that clarification.

developers writing smart contracts, Haskell developers who want to write Plutus scripts, 
and developers who want to learn to use the compiler, Plutus Tx. It is also designed for 

> developers who want to learn Plutus directly from the team that developed the Plutus language. 

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this means.

Reviewer 4: these all sound very similar to me, to the point it might be better to pick just one.

Author: I've updated and simplified this section quite a bit.

> Because Plutus is built on top of Haskell, it is helpful to have a background in Haskell. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because Plutus Tx is built on top of Haskell, it is helpful to have a background in Haskell. 
```

> Because Plutus Tx is built on top of Haskell, it is helpful to have a background in Haskell. 

Reviewer 4: I am not sure what it means to say plutus TX is builtin on top of haskell. Personally I try to avoid getting into whether plutus is a language or not and say instead that plutus contracts are written in Haskell.

Author: @jmchapman This page (https://plutus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/plutus-tx.html) gets into a bit of detail on this topic. My impression at this point is that we don't need to shy away from this type of statement. Although how much attention we should bring to it is another matter. 

I think it would be very helpful to come up with a list of top-level statements that are the most useful and helpful to people. For example, saying that Plutus contracts are written in Haskell is a pretty straightforward statement and easy to understand. 

I also think it's important to be technically accurate, so long as it doesn't become an obstacle to our users. Maybe levels of technical accuracy balanced with levels of helpful communication would be worth thinking about.

However, this document is also intended for developers who may not know Haskell very well. 

> This guide is also meant for people who need to reference and access specifications, 

Reviewer 2: Is it? I guess we link to them.

Author: Actually it seems like links to specifications is very light. I'd like to consider more carefully what the appropriate scope for this documentation is on this point. Do you think we should make a more obvious effort to link to specifications and the like? We currently have a "Reference" section, and I think that section has some Reference sort of content, but not heavily so.

Reviewer 4: Can we say how we will cater to the audience that doesn't know haskell well - e.g., by assuming a certain level and explaining advanced concepts or by linking to background material etc.

A key specification to link to is the ledger spec, as well as the plutus core spec.

Author: Honestly I can't pinpoint where/how I got the impression that we are targeting this documentation to people who may not have much understanding of Haskell already. I'd like to revisit this question. What is the minimum level of technical comprehension of Haskell that someone needs in order to get something helpful from it? What do we want to say about that, if anything?

Author: @jmchapman Thanks for mentioning the ledger spec and plutus core spec. I'll update with links to those.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should be targeting people who don't know Haskell. Some of the conceptual explanation stuff may be useful for them, though.

Author: I changed this to say that some knowledge of Haskell is expected.

> as well as for certification companies and certification auditors. 

Reviewer 4: could perhaps say what they would use it for - e.g. as a reference.

Author: Good point. I'd like to flesh this out a bit in a more tangible way. 

@asutherlandus Do you have one or two statements you could offer to illustrate how certification companies and certification auditors may need to reference our documentation here? What does that look like?

Plutus Core and Plutus Tx User Guide
==================================================

Intended Audience
---------------------------

> The intended audience of this documentation includes people who need to implement 

Reviewer 5: nitpicking
```suggestion
The intended audience of this documentation includes people who want to implement 
```

Author: Thanks for looking it over @thealmarty.
